Schizophrenia risk from complex variation of complement component 4

Schizophrenia genetics complements its mechanistic understanding

Author Correction: Schizophrenia risk from complex variation of complement component 4.

Psychiatric disorders: Linking genetic risk to pruning.

Schizophrenia: From genetics to physiology at last.

Schizophrenia is a heritable brain illness with unknown pathogenic mechanisms. Schizophrenia’s strongest genetic association at a population level involves variation in the Major Histocompatibility Complex (MHC) locus, but the genes and molecular mechanisms accounting for this have been challenging to recognize. We show here that schizophrenia’s association with the MHC locus arises in substantial part from many structurally diverse alleles of the complement component 4 ( C4 ) genes. We found that these alleles promoted widely varying levels of  C4A  and  C4B  expression and associated with schizophrenia in proportion to their tendency to promote greater expression of  C4A  in the brain. Human C4 protein localized at neuronal synapses, dendrites, axons, and cell bodies. In mice, C4 mediated synapse elimination during postnatal development. These results implicate excessive complement activity in the development of schizophrenia and may help explain the reduced numbers of synapses in the brains of individuals affected with schizophrenia.

Introduction

Schizophrenia is a heritable psychiatric disorder involving impairments in cognition, perception and motivation that usually manifest late in adolescence or early in adulthood. The pathogenic mechanisms underlying schizophrenia are unknown, but observers have repeatedly noted pathological features involving excessive loss of gray matter 1 , 2  and reduced numbers of synaptic structures on neurons 3 – 5 . While treatments exist for the psychotic symptoms of schizophrenia, there is no mechanistic understanding of, nor effective therapies to prevent or treat, the cognitive impairments and deficit symptoms of schizophrenia, its earliest and most constant features. An important goal in human genetics is to find the biological processes that underlie such disorders.

More than 100 loci in the human genome contain SNP haplotypes that associate with risk of schizophrenia 6 ; the functional alleles and mechanisms at these loci remain to be discovered. By far the strongest such genetic relationship is schizophrenia’s unexplained association with genetic markers across the Major Histocompatibility Complex (MHC) locus, which spans several megabases of chromosome 6 6 – 10 . The MHC locus is best known for its role in immunity, containing 18 highly polymorphic human leukocyte antigen ( HLA ) genes that encode a vast suite of antigen-presenting molecules. In some autoimmune diseases, genetic associations at the MHC locus arise from alleles of  HLA  genes 11 , 12 ; however, schizophrenia’s association to the MHC is not yet explained.

Though the functional alleles that give rise to genetic associations have in general been challenging to find, the schizophrenia-MHC association has been particularly challenging, as schizophrenia’s complex pattern of association to markers in the MHC locus spans hundreds of genes and does not correspond to the linkage disequilibrium (LD) around any known variant 6 , 10 . This prompted us to consider cryptic genetic influences that might generate unconventional genetic signals. The most strongly associated markers in several large case/control cohorts were near a complex, multi-allelic, and only partially characterized form of genome variation that affects the  C4  gene encoding complement component 4 ( Extended Data Fig. 1 ). The association of schizophrenia to  CSMD1 6 , 10 , which encodes a regulator of C4 13 , further motivated us to consider  C4 .

Results

C4  structures and MHC SNP haplotypes

Human  C4  exists as two functionally distinct genes (isotypes),  C4A  and  C4B ; both vary in structure and copy number. One to three  C4  genes ( C4A  and/or  C4B ) are commonly present as a tandem array within the MHC class III region ( Fig. 1a ,  Extended Data Fig. 1g )  14 – 18 . The protein products of  C4A  and  C4B  bind different molecular targets 19 , 20 .  C4A  and  C4B  segregate in both long and short genomic forms ( C4 AL, AS, BL and BS), distinguished by the presence or absence (in intron 9) of a human endogenous retroviral (HERV) insertion that lengthens  C4  from 14 to 21 kb without changing the C4 protein sequence 16  ( Fig. 1b ).

We developed a way ( Extended Data Fig. 2 ) to identify the “structural haplotypes” of  C4  – the copy number of  C4A  and  C4B  and the long/short (HERV) status of each  C4A  and  C4B  copy – present on 222 copies of human chromosome 6. Using droplet digital PCR (ddPCR), we found that genomes contained 0–5  C4A  genes, 0–3  C4B  genes, 1–5 long (L)  C4  genes, and 0–3 short (S)  C4  genes ( Extended Data Fig. 2a, b ). We also developed assays to determine the long/short status of each  C4A  and  C4B  gene copy ( Extended Data Fig. 2c ), thus revealing copy number of  C4 AL,  C4 BL,  C4 AS, and  C4 BS in each genome ( Methods ).

We analyzed inheritance in father-mother-offspring trios ( Extended Data Fig. 2d ) to identify the  C4A  and  C4B  contents of individual alleles ( Extended Data Fig. 2e ). We found that 4 common  C4  structural haplotypes (AL-BL, AL-BS, AL-AL, and BS) were collectively present on 90% of the 222 independent chromosomes sampled; 11 uncommon  C4  haplotypes comprised the other 10% ( Fig. 1c ).

The series of many SNP alleles along a genomic segment (the SNP haplotype) can be used to identify chromosomal segments that come from shared common ancestors. We identified the SNP haplotype(s) on which each  C4  locus structure was present ( Fig. 2 ). The three most common  C4  locus structures were each present on multiple MHC SNP haplotypes ( Fig. 2 ). For example, the  C4  AL-BS structure (frequency 31%) was present on five common haplotypes (frequencies 4%, 4%, 4%, 8%, and 6%) and many rare haplotypes (collective frequency 5%,  Fig. 2 ). Reflecting this haplotype diversity, each of these  C4  structures exhibited real but only partial correlation to individual SNPs ( Extended Data Fig. 3 ). The relationship between  C4  structures and SNP haplotypes was generally one-to-many: a  C4  structure might be present on many haplotypes, but a given SNP haplotype tended to have one characteristic  C4  structure ( Fig. 2 ).

C4  expression variation in the brain

Since  C4A  and  C4B  vary in both copy number and  C4 -HERV status ( Fig. 1 ), and because other HERVs can function as enhancers 21 – 23 ,  C4  variation might affect  C4  genes’ expression. We assessed how  C4  structural variation related to RNA expression of  C4A  and  C4B  in eight panels of  post mortem  human adult brain samples (674 samples from 245 distinct donors in 3 cohorts,  Methods ).

The results of this expression analysis were consistent across all five brain regions analyzed. First, RNA expression of  C4A  and  C4B  increased proportionally with copy number of  C4A  and  C4B  respectively ( Fig. 3a, b ;  Extended Data Fig. 4 ). (These observations mirror earlier observations in human serum 24 .) Second, expression levels of  C4A  were 2–3 times greater than expression levels of  C4B , even after controlling for relative copy number in each genome ( Fig. 3c ). Third, copy number of the  C4 -HERV sequence increased the ratio of  C4A  to  C4B  expression ( p  < 10 −7 ,  p  < 10 −2 ,  p  < 10 −3 ) ( Fig. 3c ,  Extended Data Fig. 4 ).

We used the above data to create genetic predictors of  C4A  and  C4B  expression levels in the brain ( Methods ). If  C4A  or  C4B  expression levels influence a phenotype, then the aggregate genetic predictor might associate to schizophrenia more strongly than individual variants do.

C4  structural variation in schizophrenia

Schizophrenia cases and controls from 22 countries have been analyzed genome-wide for SNPs, implicating the MHC locus as the strongest of more than 100 genome-wide-significant associations 6 . Our analysis above showed that long haplotypes defined by many SNPs carry characteristic  C4  alleles ( Fig. 2 ), potentially making it possible to infer  C4  alleles by statistical imputation 25  from combinations of many SNPs. We used our 222 integrated haplotypes of MHC SNPs and  C4  alleles ( Fig. 2 ) as reference chromosomes for imputation. We found that the four most common structural forms of the  C4A/C4B  locus (BS, AL-BS, AL-BL, and AL-AL) could be inferred with reasonably high accuracy (generally 0.70 <  r 2  < 1.00).

We then analyzed SNP data from 28,799 schizophrenia cases and 35,986 controls, from 40 cohorts in 22 countries contributing to the Psychiatric Genomics Consortium (PGC) 6 . We evaluated association to 7,751 SNPs across the extended MHC locus (chr6: 25–34Mb), to  C4  structural alleles ( Fig. 1c ), and to  HLA  sequence polymorphisms imputed from the SNP data. We also predicted levels of  C4A  and  C4B  expression from the imputed  C4  structural alleles.

The association of schizophrenia to these genetic variants exhibited two prominent features ( Fig. 4a, b ). One feature involved a large set of similarly-associating SNPs spanning 2 Mb across the distal end of the extended MHC region. (Below we use this set’s most strongly associating SNP, rs13194504, as its genetic proxy.) The other peak of association centered at  C4 , where schizophrenia associated most strongly with the genetic predictor of  C4A  expression levels ( p  = 3.6×10 −24 ) ( Fig. 4a ,  Extended Data Fig. 5 ). In the region near  C4  (chromosome 6, 31–33 Mb), the more strongly a SNP correlated with predicted  C4A  expression, the more strongly it associated with schizophrenia ( Fig. 4b , bottom panel).

Although the variation at  C4  and in the distal extended MHC region associated to schizophrenia with similar strengths ( p  = 3.6×10 −24  and 5.5×10 −28 , respectively), their correlation with each other was low ( r 2  = 0.18,  Fig. 4b ), suggesting that they reflect distinct genetic influences. Conditional analysis confirmed this: in analyses controlling for either rs13194504 or genetically predicted  C4A  expression, the other genetic variable still defined a genome-wide-significant association peak ( p  = 7.8×10 −10  and 8.0×10 −14 ,  Fig. 4c, d ). Controlling for both genetic variables revealed a third association signal just proximal to the MHC locus ( Fig. 4e ) involving SNPs around  BAK1  and  SYNGAP1 , the latter of which encodes a major component of the postsynaptic density;  de novo  loss-of-function mutations in  SYNGAP1  associate with autism 26 . In joint analysis, all three genetic signals remained significant ( p  = 8.0×10 −14 , 2.8×10 −8 , and 1.7×10 −8 , respectively) and no additional genome-wide significant signals remained in the MHC locus ( Fig. 4f ).

In some autoimmune diseases with genetic associations in the MHC locus, alleles of  HLA  genes associate more strongly than do other variants in the MHC locus, appearing to explain the associations 11 , 12 . In contrast, in schizophrenia, classical  HLA  alleles associated to schizophrenia less strongly than other genetic variants in the MHC region did ( Extended Data Fig. 6 ). We further considered the strongest schizophrenia associations to classical  HLA  alleles at distinct loci (involving  HLA-B *0801,  HLA-DRB1 *0301, and  HLA-DQB1 *02); conditional analysis indicated that each could be explained by LD to the stronger signals at  C4  and rs13194504 ( Extended Data Fig. 7 ).

If each  C4  allele affects schizophrenia risk via its effect on  C4A  expression, then this relationship should be visible across specific  C4  alleles. We measured schizophrenia risk levels for the common  C4  structural alleles (BS, AL-BS, AL-BL, and AL-AL); these alleles showed relative risks ranging from 1.00 to 1.27 ( Fig. 5a ). We also estimated (from the  post mortem  brain samples) the  C4A  expression levels generated by these four alleles ( Fig. 5b ). Schizophrenia risk and  C4A  expression levels yielded the same ordering of the  C4  allelic series ( Fig. 5a, b ).

We sought an even more stringent test. If this allelic series of relationships to schizophrenia risk ( Fig. 5a ) arises from  C4  locus structure – rather than from other genetic variation in the MHC locus – then a given  C4  structure should exhibit the same schizophrenia risk regardless of the MHC haplotype on which it appears. We measured the schizophrenia association of all 13 common combinations of  C4  structure and MHC SNP haplotype ( Fig. 5c ). Across this allelic series, each  C4  allele exhibited a characteristic level of schizophrenia risk, regardless of the haplotype on which it appeared ( Fig. 5c ).

C4A  RNA expression in schizophrenia

These genetic findings ( Fig. 5a,c ) predict that  C4A  expression might be elevated in brain tissue from schizophrenia patients. We measured  C4A  RNA expression levels in brain tissue from 35 schizophrenia patients and 70 individuals without schizophrenia. The median expression of  C4A  in brain tissues from schizophrenia patients was 1.4-fold greater ( p  = 2×10 −5  by Mann-Whitney test;  Fig. 5d ) and was elevated in each of the five brain regions assayed ( Extended Data Fig. 8 ). This relationship did not meaningfully change in analyses adjusted for age or  post mortem  interval. The relationship remained significant after correcting for the higher average  C4A  copy number among the brain donors affected with schizophrenia (1.3-fold greater,  p  = 0.002). Some earlier studies have also reported elevated levels of complement proteins in serum of schizophrenia patients 27 , 28 .

C4 in the central nervous system

C4 is a critical component of the classical complement cascade, an innate-immune-system pathway that rapidly recognizes and eliminates pathogens and cellular debris. In the brain, other genes in the classical complement cascade have been implicated in the elimination or “pruning” of synapses  29 – 31 .

To evaluate the distribution of C4 in human brain, we performed immunohistochemistry on sections of the prefrontal cortex and hippocampus. We observed C4+ cells in the gray and white matter, with the greatest number of C4+ cells detected in the hippocampus. Co-staining with cell-type-specific markers revealed C4 in subsets of NeuN +  neurons ( Fig. 6a ; antibody specificity further evaluated in  Extended Data Fig. 9a ) and a subset of astrocytes. Much of the C4 immunoreactivity was punctate ( Fig. 6b ), colocalizing with synaptic puncta identified by co-immunostaining for the pre- and postsynaptic markers VGLUT1/2 and PSD95 ( Fig. 6b ). These results suggest that C4 is produced by, or deposited on, neurons and synapses.

To further characterize neuronal C4, we cultured human primary cortical neurons and evaluated C4 expression, localization and secretion. Neurons expressed  C4  mRNA and secreted C4 protein ( Extended Data Fig. 9c ). Neurons exhibited C4-immunoreactive puncta along their processes and cell bodies ( Fig. 6c, d ; antibody specificity further evaluated in  Extended Data Fig. 9b ). About 75% of C4 immunoreactivity localized to neuronal processes ( Fig. 6c ); of the C4 in neuronal processes, approximately 65% was observed in dendrites (MAP2+, NF+ processes) and 35% in axons (MAP2-, NF+ processes). Punctate C4 immunoreactivity was observed at 48% of structural synapses as defined by co-localized synaptotagmin and PSD-95 ( Fig. 6d ).

The association of increased C4 with schizophrenia ( Fig. 4 ,  5 ), the presence of C4 at synapses ( Fig. 6b, d ), the involvement of other complement proteins in synapse elimination 29 – 31 , and earlier reports of decreased synapse numbers in schizophrenia patients 3 – 5 , together suggested that C4 might work with other components of the classical complement cascade to promote synaptic pruning. To test this hypothesis, we moved to a mouse model. ( C4A  and  C4B  appear to have functionally specialized outside the rodent lineage, but the mouse genome contains a  C4  gene that shares features with both  C4A  and  C4B ,  Extended Data Fig. 10a, b ). Impairments in schizophrenia tend to affect higher cognitive functions and recently-expanded brain regions for which analogies in mice are uncertain 32 . However, waves of postnatal synapse elimination occur in many brain regions, and strong experimental models have been established in several mammalian visual systems in which synaptic projections from retinal ganglion cells (RGCs) onto thalamic relay neurons within the dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus (dLGN) of the visual thalamus undergo activity-dependent synaptic refinement 29 – 31 , 33 – 35 . We found that  C4  RNA was expressed in the LGN and in RGCs purified from retina ( Extended Data Fig. 10c ).

In the immune system, C4 promotes C3 activation, allowing C3 to covalently attach onto its targets and promote their engulfment by phagocytic cells. In the developing mouse brain, C3 targets subsets of synapses and is required for synapse elimination by microglia, the principal CNS cells expressing receptors for complement 29 , 30 . We found that in mice deficient in  C4 36 , C3 immunostaining in the dLGN was greatly reduced compared to WT littermates ( Fig. 7a, b ), with fewer synaptic inputs being C3-positive in the absence of C4 ( Fig. 7c ). These data demonstrate a role for C4 in complement deposition on synaptic inputs.

We then evaluated whether mice deficient in  C4  had defects in synaptic remodeling, as has been described for  C3 -deficient mice 29 . Mice lacking functional  C4  exhibited greater overlap between RGC inputs from the two eyes ( p  < 0.001) than wild-type littermate controls, suggesting reduced synaptic pruning ( Fig. 7d ;  Extended Data Fig. 10d, e ;  Methods ). The degree of deficit in  C4 −/−  mice was similar to that previously reported for  C1q −/−  and  C3 −/−  mice 29 , 31 . Heterozygous  C4 +/−  mice, with one wild-type copy of  C4 , had an intermediate phenotype ( Fig. 7d ). These data provide direct evidence that C4 mediates synaptic refinement in the developing brain.

Discussion

We developed ways to analyze a complex form of genome structural variation ( Fig. 1 – 2 ) and discovered that schizophrenia’s association with variation in the MHC locus involves many common, structurally distinct  C4  alleles that affect expression of  C4A  and  C4B  in the brain; each allele associated with schizophrenia risk in proportion to its effect on  C4A  expression ( Fig. 3 – 5 ). We found that C4 is expressed by neurons, localized to dendrites, axons, and synapses, and secreted ( Fig. 6 ); and that C4 promotes synapse elimination during the developmentally timed maturation of a neuronal circuit ( Fig. 7 ).

In humans, adolescence and early adulthood bring extensive elimination of synapses in distributed association regions of cerebral cortex, such as the prefrontal cortex, that have greatly expanded in recent human evolution 37 – 40 . Synapse elimination in human association cortex appears to continue from adolescence into the third decade of life 39 . This late phase of cortical maturation, which may distinguish humans even from some other primates 37 , corresponds to the period during which schizophrenia most often becomes clinically apparent and patients’ cognitive function declines, a temporal correspondence that others have also noted 41 .

Principal pathological findings in schizophrenia brains involve loss of cortical gray matter without cell death: affected individuals exhibit abnormal cortical thinning 1 , 2  and abnormally reduced numbers of synaptic structures on cortical pyramidal neurons 3 – 5 . The possibility that neuron-microglia interactions via the complement cascade contribute to schizophrenia pathogenesis – for example, that schizophrenia arises or intensifies from excessive or inappropriate synaptic pruning during adolescence and early adulthood – would offer a potential mechanism for these longstanding observations about age of onset and synapse loss. Many other genetic findings in schizophrenia involve genes that encode synaptic proteins 6 , 42 – 44 . Diverse synaptic abnormalities might interact with the complement system and other pathways 45 , 46  to cause excessive simulation of microglia and/or elimination of synapses.

The two human  C4  genes ( C4A  and  C4B ) exhibited distinct relationships with schizophrenia risk, with increased risk associating most strongly with variation that increases expression of  C4A . Human C4A and C4B proteins, whose functional specialization appears to be evolutionarily recent ( Extended Data Fig. 10a ), show striking biochemical differences: C4A more readily forms amide bonds with proteins, while C4B favors binding to carbohydrate surfaces 19 , 20 , differences with an established basis in C4 protein sequence and structure 47 , 48 . An intriguing possibility is that C4A and C4B differ in affinity for an unknown binding site at synapses.

To date, few GWAS associations have been explained by specific functional alleles. An unexpected finding at  C4  involves the large number of common, functionally distinct forms of the same locus that appear to contribute to schizophrenia risk. The human genome contains hundreds of other genes with complex, multi-allelic forms of structural variation 49 . It will be important to learn the extent to which such variation contributes to brain diseases and indeed to all human phenotypes.

Extended Data

Association of schizophrenia to common variants in the MHC locus in individual case-control cohorts, and schematic of the repeat module containing  C4 .

( a–f ) Data for several schizophrenia case-control cohorts that were genome-scanned before we began this work ( a–d ) exhibits peaks of association near chr6:32Mb (blue vertical line) on the human genome reference sequence (GRCh37/hg19). Note that association patterns vary from cohort to cohort, reflecting statistical sampling fluctuations and potentially fluctuations in allele frequencies of the (unknown) causal variants in different cohorts. Cohorts such as in ( b ), ( e ) and ( f ) suggest the existence of effects at multiple loci within the MHC region. Even in the cohorts with simpler peaks ( a, c, d ), the pattern of association across the individual SNPs at chr6:32 Mb does not correspond to the linkage disequilibrium (LD) around any known variant. This motivated the focus in the current work on cryptic genetic influences in this region that could cause unconventional association signals that do not resemble the LD patterns of individual variants.

( g ) A complex form of genome structural variation resides near chr6:32 Mb. Shown here are three of the known alternative structural forms of this genomic region. The most prominent feature of this structural variation is the tandem duplication of a genomic segment that contains a  C4  gene, 3’ fragments of the  STK19  and  TNXB  genes, and a pseudogenized copy of the  CYP21A2  gene. (This cassette is present in 1–3 copies on the three alleles depicted above; the boundaries below each haplotype demarcate the sequence that is duplicated.) Haplotypes with multiple copies of this module (middle and bottom) contain multiple functional copies of  C4 , whereas the additional gene fragments or copies denoted  STK19P, CYP21A2P , and  TNXA  are typically pseudogenized. (Rare haplotypes with a gain or loss of intact  CYP21A2  have also been observed 18 .) Note that although  C4A  and  C4B  contain multiple sequence variants, they are defined based on the differences encoded by exon 26, which determine the relative affinities of C4A and C4B for distinct molecular targets 19 , 20  ( Fig. 1 ). Many additional forms of this locus appear to have arisen by non-allelic homologous recombination and gene conversion (ref 18  and  Fig. 1 ).

Schematic of strategy for identifying the segregating structural forms of the  C4  locus. ( a ) Molecular assays for measuring copy number of the key, variable  C4  structural features – the length polymorphism (HERV insertion) that distinguishes the long (L) from the short (S) genomic form of  C4 , and the  C4A/C4B  isotypic difference. Each primer-probe-primer assay is represented with the combination of arrows (primers) and asterisk (probe) in its approximate genomic location (though not to scale). ( b ) Measurement of copy number of  C4  gene types in the genomes of 162 individuals (from HapMap CEU sample). The absolute, integer copy number of each  C4  gene type in each genome is precisely inferred from the resulting data. To ensure high accuracy, the data are further evaluated for a checksum relationship (A + B = L + S) and for concordance with earlier data from Southern blotting of 89 of the same HapMap individuals 51 . ( c ) To measure the copy number of compound structural forms of  C4  (involving combinations of L/S and A/B), we perform long-range PCR followed by quantitative measurement of the A/B isotype-distinguishing sequences in droplets. ( d ) Analysis of transmissions in father-mother-offspring trios enables inference of the  C4  gene contents of individual copies (alleles) of chromosome 6. Three example trios are shown in this schematic. ( e ) Examples of the inferred structural forms of the  C4  locus (more shown in  Fig. 1c ). For the common  C4  structures (AL-BL, AL-BS, AL-AL, and BS), genomic order of the  C4  gene copies is known from earlier assemblies of sequence contigs in individuals homozygous for MHC haplotypes due to consanguinity 17  and other molecular analyses of the  C4  locus 18 . For the rarer C4 structures, genomic order of  C4  gene copies is hypothesized or provisional.

Linkage disequilibrium relationships ( r 2 ) of MHC SNPs to forms of C4 structural variation. Correlations of SNPs in the MHC locus with ( a ) copy number of  C4  gene types and ( b ) larger-scale structural forms (haplotypes) of the  C4  locus. Dashed, vertical lines indicate the genomic location of the  C4  locus. Note that C4 structural forms show only partial correlation ( r 2 ) to the allelic states of nearby SNPs, reflecting the relationship shown in  Fig. 2 , in which a structural form of the  C4  locus often segregates on multiple different SNP haplotypes.

RNA expression of  C4A  and  C4B  in relation to copy number of  C4A, C4B , and the  C4 -HERV (long form of  C4 ), in eight panels of  post mortem  brain tissue. Copy number of  C4  structural features was measured by ddPCR; RNA expression levels were measured by RT-ddPCR. Panels  a–e  show data for tissues from the Stanley Medical Research Institute (SMRI) Array Consortium and consist of ( a ) anterior cingulate cortex, ( b ) cerebellum, ( c ) corpus callosum, ( d ) orbital frontal cortex, and ( e ) parietal cortex. Panel  f  shows data for the frontal cortex samples from the NHGRI Genes and Tissues Expression (GTEx) Project. Panels  g  and  h  show data for tissues from the SMRI Neuropathology Consortium (anterior cingulate cortex and cerebellum, respectively). These data were then used to inform (by linear regression) the derivation of a linear model for predicting each individual’s RNA expression of  C4A  and  C4B  as a function of the numbers of copies of AL, BL, AS, and BS. The derivation of this model, and the regression coefficients induced, are described in  Methods .

In the rightmost plot of each panel, expression of  C4A  (per genomic copy) is normalized to expression of  C4B  (per genomic copy) to more specifically visualize the effect of the C4-HERV by controlling for genomic copy number and for any trans-acting influences shared by  C4A  and  C4B ; the inferred regression coefficients ( Methods ) suggest that the observed effect is mostly due to increased expression of  C4A .

Detailed analysis of the association of schizophrenia to genetic variation at and around  C4 , in data from 28,799 schizophrenia cases and 35,986 controls (Psychiatric Genomics Consortium, ref  6 ). SCZ, schizophrenia; β, estimated effect size per copy of the genomic feature or allele indicated; SE, standard error. Detailed association analyses of  HLA  alleles are in  Extended Data Fig. 6 – 7 . (*) We specifically tested  C4B -null status because a 1985 study 52  reported an analysis of 165 schizophrenia patients and 330 controls in which rare  C4B -null status associated with elevated risk of schizophrenia, though two subsequent studies 53 , 54  found no association of schizophrenia to  C4B -null genotype. We sought to evaluate this using the large data set in this study, finding no association to C4B-null status. (**) Total copy number of  C4  is also strongly correlated to copy number of the  CYP21A2P  pseudogene, which is present on duplicated copies of the sequence shown in  Extended Data Fig. 1g .

Evaluation of the association of schizophrenia with  HLA  alleles and coding-sequence polymorphisms. ( a–e ) Associations to  HLA  alleles and coding-sequence polymorphisms are shown in black; to provide the context of levels of association to nearby SNPs, associations to other SNPs are shown in gray. The series of conditional analyses shown ( b–e ) parallels the analyses in  Fig. 4 . Further detail on the most strongly associating  HLA  alleles (including conditional association analysis) is provided in  Extended Data Fig. 7 .

Detailed association analysis for the most strongly associating classical  HLA  alleles. The most strongly associating  HLA  loci were  HLA-B  (in primary analyses,  Fig. 4a ,  Extended Data Fig. 6a ) and  HLA-DRB1  and  -DQB1  (in analyses controlling for the signal defined by rs13194504,  Fig. 4c ,  Extended Data Fig. 6b ). At these loci, the most strongly associating classical  HLA  alleles were  HLA-B *0801,  HLA-DRB1 *0301, and  HLA-DQB*02 , respectively. These  HLA  alleles are all in strong but partial LD with  C4  BS, the most protective of the  C4  alleles; they are also in partial LD with the low-risk allele at rs13194505, representing the distinct signal several megabases to the left ( Fig. 4 ). In joint analyses with each of these  HLA  alleles, genetically predicted  C4A  expression and rs13194505 continued to associate strongly with schizophrenia, while the  HLA  alleles did not.

In further joint analyses with rs13194504 and genetically predicted  C4A  expression, 0 of 2,514 tested  HLA  SNP, amino-acid and classical-allele polymorphisms (from ref  55 , including all variants with MAF > 0.005) associated to schizophrenia as strongly as rs13194504 or predicted  C4A  expression did.

Expression of  C4A  RNA in brain tissue (five brain regions) from 35 schizophrenia cases and 70 non-schizophrenia controls, from the Stanley Medical Research Institute Array Consortium.  C4A  RNA expression levels were measured by ddPCR.

Secretion of C4, and specificity of the monoclonal anti-C4 antibody for C4 protein in human brain tissue and cultured primary cortical neurons.

(a)  Brain tissue (from an individual affected with schizophrenia) was stained with a fluorescent secondary antibody, C4 antibody, or C4 antibody that was pre-adsorbed with purified C4 protein. Confocal images demonstrate the loss of immunoreactivity in the secondary-only and pre-adsorbed conditions.

(b)  Primary human neurons were stained with a fluorescent secondary antibody, C4 antibody, or C4 antibody that was pre-adsorbed with purified C4 protein. Confocal images demonstrate the loss of immunoreactivity in the secondary-only and pre-adsorbed conditions. Scale bar for all images = 25 µm.

( c ) Secretion of C4 protein by cultured primary neurons. Western blot for C4 protein analysis. (+) Purified human C4 protein. (−) Unconditioned medium, a negative control. (HN-conditioned) shows the same medium after conditioning by cultured human neurons at days 7 (d7) and 30 (d30). Details of Western blot protocol, antibody catalog numbers and concentrations used are in  Methods . C4 molecular weight ~210 kDa.

Mouse  C4  genes and additional analyses of the dLGN eye segregation phenotype in  C4  mutant mice and wild-type and heterozygous littermate controls.

( a ) The functional specialization of  C4  into  C4A  and  C4B  in humans does not have an analogy in mice. Although the mouse genome contains both a  C4  gene and a  C4 -like gene (classically called  Slp ), and these genes are also present as a tandem duplication within the mouse MHC locus, analysis of the encoded protein sequences indicates a distinct specialization, as illustrated by the protein phylogenetic tree. Above, mouse  Slp  is indicated in gray to reflect its potential pseudogenization:  Slp  is already known to have mutations at a C1s cleavage site, which are thought to abrogate activation of the protein through the classical complement pathway 56 ; and the  M. musculus  reference genome sequence (mm10) at  Slp  shows a 1-bp deletion (relative to  C4 ) within the coding region at chr17:34815158, which would be predicted to cause a premature termination of the encoded protein. (In some genome data resources, mouse  Slp  and  C4  have been annotated respectively as “ C4a ” (e.g.  NM_011413.2 ) and “ C4b ” (e.g.  NM_009780.2 ) based on synteny with the human  C4A  and  C4B  genes, but the above sequence analysis indicates that they are not paralogous to  C4A  and  C4B .)

( b ) Sequence differences between  C4A  and  C4B  – which are otherwise 99.5% identical at an amino acid level – are concentrated at the “isotypic site” where they shape each isotype's relative affinity for different molecular targets 19 , 20 . At the isotypic site, mouse C4 contains a combination of the residues present in human C4A and C4B.

( c ) Expression of mouse  C4  mRNA in whole retina and lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN) from P5 animals and in purified retinal ganglion cells (RGCs) from P5 and P15 animals. These time points were chosen as P5 is a time of more robust synaptic refinement in the retinogeniculate system compared to P15. The same assays detected no  C4  RNA in control RNA isolated from  C4 −/− mice (not shown).

N = 3 samples for p5 retina, LGN, and P15 RGCs, N = 4 samples for P5 RGCs; *  p  < 0.05 by ANOVA with post hoc Tukey-Kramer multiple-comparisons test.

( d ) Representative images of dLGN innervation by contralateral projections (red in bottom image), ipsilateral projections (green in bottom image), and their overlap (yellow in bottom image). Scale bar = 100 µm

( e ) Quantification of the percentage of total dLGN area receiving both contralateral and ipsilateral projections shows a significant increase in  C4 −/− compared to WT littermates (ANOVA, N = 5 mice/group,  p  < 0.01). These data are consistent with results using  R -value analysis as shown in  Fig. 7 .

( f ) Quantification of total dLGN area showed no significant difference between WT and  C4 −/− mice (ANOVA, N = 5 per group,  p  > 0.05).

( g ) Quantification of dLGN area receiving ipsilateral innervation showed a significant increase in ipsilateral territory in the  C4 −/− mice compared to WT littermates (AVOVA, N = 5 mice/group,  p  > 0.01). This result is consistent with defects in eye specific segregation. Scale bar = 100 µm

( h ) The number of RGCs in the retina was estimated by counting the number of Brn3a+ cells in WT and  C4 −/− mice. No differences were observed between WT and  C4 −/− ( t -test, N = 4 mice/group,  p  > 0.05). Scale bar = 100 µm.

Supplementary Material

Cortex mapping reveals regionally specific patterns of genetic and disease-specific gray-matter deficits in twins discordant for schizophrenia

Progressive reduction in cortical thickness as psychosis develops: a multisite longitudinal neuroimaging study of youth at elevated clinical risk

Reduced dendritic spine density on cerebral cortical pyramidal neurons in schizophrenia

Decreased dendritic spine density on prefrontal cortical pyramidal neurons in schizophrenia

Dendritic spine pathology in schizophrenia

Biological insights from 108 schizophrenia-associated genetic loci

Common variants on chromosome 6p22.1 are associated with schizophrenia

Common variants conferring risk of schizophrenia

Common polygenic variation contributes to risk of schizophrenia and bipolar disorder

Genome-wide association study identifies five new schizophrenia loci

Confirmation of HLA class II independent type 1 diabetes associations in the major histocompatibility complex including HLA-B and HLA-A

Five amino acids in three HLA proteins explain most of the association between MHC and seropositive rheumatoid arthritis

The novel complement inhibitor human CUB and Sushi multiple domains 1 (CSMD1) protein promotes factor I-mediated degradation of C4b and C3b and inhibits the membrane attack complex assembly

A molecular map of the human major histocompatibility complex class III region linking complement genes C4, C2 and factor B

Structure and organization of the C4 genes

The dichotomous size variation of human complement C4 genes is mediated by a novel family of endogenous retroviruses, which also establishes species-specific genomic patterns among Old World primates

Variation analysis and gene annotation of eight MHC haplotypes: the MHC Haplotype Project

Fine-tuned characterization of RCCX copy number variants and their relationship with extended MHC haplotypes

A comparison of the properties of two classes, C4A and C4B, of the human complement component C4

The molecular basis for the difference in immune hemolysis activity of the Chido and Rodgers isotypes of human complement component C4

Only those genes of the KIAA1245 gene subfamily that contain HERV(K) LTRs in their introns are transcriptionally active

Human endogenous retroviruses with transcriptional potential in the brain

Human-specific endogenous retroviral insert serves as an enhancer for the schizophrenia-linked gene PRODH

Diversity in intrinsic strengths of the human complement system: serum C4 protein concentrations correlate with C4 gene size and polygenic variations, hemolytic activities, and body mass index

Rapid and accurate haplotype phasing and missing-data inference for whole-genome association studies by use of localized haplotype clustering

The contribution of de novo coding mutations to autism spectrum disorder

Increased complement classical and mannan-binding lectin pathway activities in schizophrenia

Classical pathway complement activity in schizophrenia

The classical complement cascade mediates CNS synapse elimination

Microglia sculpt postnatal neural circuits in an activity and complement-dependent manner

TGF-beta signaling regulates neuronal C1q expression and developmental synaptic refinement

Modeling psychiatric disorders for developing effective treatments

Prenatal development of functional connections in the cat's retinogeniculate pathway

Prenatal development of retinal ganglion cell axons: segregation into eye-specific layers within the cat's lateral geniculate nucleus

Developmental remodeling of the retinogeniculate synapse

Regulation of the B cell response to T-dependent antigens by classical pathway complement

Regional differences in synaptogenesis in human cerebral cortex

Synaptic density in human frontal cortex - developmental changes and effects of aging

Extraordinary neoteny of synaptic spines in the human prefrontal cortex

The evolution of distributed association networks in the human brain

Schizophrenia: caused by a fault in programmed synaptic elimination during adolescence?

De novo CNV analysis implicates specific abnormalities of postsynaptic signalling complexes in the pathogenesis of schizophrenia

De novo mutations in schizophrenia implicate synaptic networks

A polygenic burden of rare disruptive mutations in schizophrenia

Classical MHCI molecules regulate retinogeniculate refinement and limit ocular dominance plasticity

Synapse elimination and learning rules co-regulated by MHC class I H2-Db

X-ray crystal structure of the C4d fragment of human complement component C4

The reaction mechanism of the internal thioester in the human complement component C4

Large multiallelic copy number variations in humans

Unbiased analysis of bulk axonal segregation patterns

Assessment of complement C4 gene copy number using the paralog ratio test

Complement factor C4 in schizophrenia

Investigation of complement C4B deficiency in schizophrenia

Complement C4B protein in schizophrenia

Imputing amino acid polymorphisms in human leukocyte antigens

Complete nucleotide and derived amino acid sequences of sex-limited protein (Slp), nonfunctional isotype of the fourth component of mouse complement (C4)
